1.What is ‘emotional intelligence’ and how can it be developed in people? How does it help an individual in taking ethical decisions?
2. Anger is a harmful negative emotion. It is injurious to both personal life and work life. (a) Discuss how it leads to negative emotions and undesirable behaviours. (b) How can it be managed and controlled?
3. How will you apply emotional intelligence in administrative practices?
4. “Emotional Intelligence is the ability to make your emotions work for you instead of against you”. Do you agree with this view? Discuss.
5. What are the main components of emotional intelligence (EI) ? Can they be learned? Discuss.
6. Hatred is destructive of a person's wisdom and conscience that can poison a nation's spirit. Do you agree with this view? Justify your answer. (150 words)
7. In case of crisis of conscience does emotional intelligence help to overcome the same without compromising the ethical or moral stand that you are likely to follow? Critically examine.
8. "What really matters for success, character, happiness and lifelong achievements is a definite set of emotional skills — your EQ - not just purely cognitive abilities that are measured by conventional IQ tests." Do you agree with this view? Give reasons in support of your answer.
9. In the era of hyper-automation and algorithmic decision-making, empathy and compassionate governance are emerging as more critical leadership traits than technical competence.
10. The pervasive culture of instant gratification and digital distractions has made cognitive endurance and self-regulation an essential life skill for ethical decision-making. Elucidate.
11. The escalation of climate anxiety and environmental degradation has made ecological consciousness and generational empathy an essential moral responsibility in modern governance. Discuss.
12. In an increasingly polarized world driven by echo chambers, cognitive flexibility and tolerance are emerging as more vital civic virtues than mere intellectual correctness. Examine.
13. The rise of deepfakes, misinformation, and digital manipulation has made epistemic integrity andmoral discernment an essential ethical shield in contemporary society.
14. Anger and intolerance are the enemies of correct understanding - M.Gandhi.
15. ’’In doing good things ,everything is permitted which is not prohibited expressly or by clear implication .’’Examine the statement with suitable examples in the context of a public servant discharging his/her duties.
16. All human beings aspire for happiness .Do you agree? What does happiness mean to you? Explain with examples.
17.What do you understand by the term voice of conscience ?How do you prepare yourself to heed to the voice of conscience?